---
title: "Kalpa 2022: Editorial"
description: "The birth and rebirth of Kalpa have been written about in detail as Editorials of previous copies. Redoing it has little merit as they’re all available on the website. With my experience as a Managing Editor of Kalpa, I would like to share some thoughts I encountered and how they were, at least partially, answered. Kalpa, since its rebirth, has been branded as..."
authors: ["Manav Sivaram"]
pubDate: "2022-11-02"
heroImage: "/2022editorial_cover.jpg"
type: ""
---

The birth and rebirth of Kalpa have been written about in detail as Editorials of previous copies. Redoing it has little merit as they’re all available on the website. With my experience as a Managing Editor of Kalpa, I would like to share some thoughts I encountered and how they were, at least partially, answered. Kalpa, since its rebirth, has been branded as the Students’ Media Body of IISER Pune. In these times when established  ‘media bodies’ find it hard to thrive due to funding, manpower and censorship, why is there a need for another? Taking one step back, why did a college magazine restructure itself into a ‘media body’? What does this new position mean to the organisation, and where are we headed?

IISER is branded as a premier culture plate bringing up colonies of humans who would be rewarded to question and scrutinise the working of the universe. In other words, a premier institute that promotes students to pursue a career in academia. The world outside the walls of these institutes identifies scientists with two quintessentials: the carriers of all “true” knowledge and ones away from socio-political life. For a joining student, the walls of the institute do the honour of breaking the former. The latter, however, lives through at least half the population. At IISER, this socio-political engagement is hard to bring forth and needs an active force to do it. However, in the past few years, IISER has increasingly seen an active engagement of students in responding to national-level events. Recently, the campus has also seen an uprising of a collective voice for the demands of students. The Students’ Council was instituted in 2020 to recognise students’ demands and an avenue to involve students in decision-making. A young constitution, the Council has yet to fully realise its potential and understand the amendments it needs for smooth and effective functioning. The student protests and the Council affect and are part of the student life on campus, if not so much the “solidarity expressions”. Kalpa’s existence lies here; to spread the word and amplify the conversation. The media is responsible for ensuring that even the most non-participative are aware.

Kalpa began as the yearly archive of the student life on campus: what the cultures do when not being cultured. Other than acknowledging student life, it built a platform for literary and art enthusiasts among students and faculty to put forth their writings and thoughts. It is all compiled into one opus. There is great tediousness to the work of compilation, and often, the compilation follows a standard process that has evolved through the years. In the time of the internet, the format of a yearly magazine has lost its relevance. Social media has become a space for instant dispensation and archiving of events. During the compilation of the annual magazine, past events often need to be recreated through interviews, photos and video clips. And this information lies spread across the hazy memories of a hundred tired science students and half a dozen busy and exhausted faculty members; phew is the word of choice. Many new media, Instagram and the like, make automated annual archives yearly. Add to this the fact that every student club has a page on these social media, reducing the workload of a yearly magazine to the point of pushing it into an existential crisis. In a light vein, this motivated the idea of Kalpa being a student media body. A platform with a considerable reputation across the institute can do much more than just archiving. 

The title of ‘media body’ imposes some adjectives on Kalpa. Being ‘of students of IISER Pune’, its focus group is the general students’ body. Its primary role is to provide a platform for the student body to exhibit its opinions and raise its concerns. It needs to be comprehensive and neutral. It is expected to write about both sides of the coin but also its edges, metal and the sovereign who commissioned it. Often students’ problems are reduced to the general perception with no regard to other factors in the system. As has always been said, the devil lies in the details. The level of detail in each project undertaken by any team in Kalpa is commendable. Primarily those of 98 Acres, the journalistic pieces are famous and commended even by faculty members. The backing of a strong editorial and feedback team was crucial to this achievement. However, there has been a lack of real-time reporting in Kalpa. Events on campus, like student uprisings, need to be covered in detail in real-time. The results of these movements are sure to affect the students’ lives. The growing ignorance towards such activities is concerning. Apathy towards one’s vulnerabilities is dangerous, even more when it becomes ignorance. There needs to be a push to bring out the social responsibility from within the ones who were primarily engaged only with preparations for competitive exams in the toxic culture they have around them. Student collectivisations on campus often bring forth thought-out and productive demands. Apart from an initial surge, students’ participation in these movements falls off to a handful who are trusted with the responsibility. Had there been regular updates of the happenings, one could expect higher participation. This is where Kalpa stands underutilised. 

In its foundational and ideological senses, Kalpa cannot discriminate on which event to report or otherwise. But as with these events, there is a lack of volunteers in Kalpa. Reporting has a discipline associated with it. A reporter must disengage their opinions from the facts and choose the most relevant information to the audience, a non-trivial task for most. This learning curve in doing something simple, like writing a caption to a post, is not something everyone is willing to stick through. Another way is writing an opinion piece. But to put down one’s thoughts coherent enough for a distant stranger to comprehend is not a small job; it requires patience, and demands perseverance and support in the form of criticism. Kalpa has the potential to provide this support as a community. The future activities of Kalpa will need to focus on extensive team-building. The team needs to meet more often, either with an agenda or to catch up simply. It needs to build a support group for its reporters, writers, editors, and designers to function more collaboratively. When IISER seems to be more active than ever, there is excellent potential for Kalpa to pick up its regularity and build its team and legacy. Projects like those of 98 Acres will continue to make the impact they do and are integral to Kalpa’s work. But the team needs to come together and realise the benefits of collaboration. It is also worth noting the diverse writing and communication skills one develops in Kalpa that are often underrated in student life.

Before concluding, a note to the future Editorial Boards of Kalpa: there is a distinction between upholding neutrality in reports and holding an Editorial position. During times of importance, the Board shouldn’t be discouraged from having “lopsided” opinions. The position, however, should be democratic and well thought-through. The Editorial should demarcate and present the dissenting opinions as well. There is a sanctity to work done at Kalpa, and it needs to be protected at all costs especially through tough times. Institutes and individual people have their interests, but Kalpa’s neutrality awards it the stature it currently enjoys in IISER’s discourse.

As we present this edition of Kalpa, I am thankful to the team that worked together to put this up. I thank all contributors, including writers, designers, editors, reviewers, and others, for their help throughout the year. I would like to thank the Editorial Board, Kalpa 2022, for being a fantastic team and congratulate them on putting together this edition. On behalf of the Editorial Board, I would also like to express immense gratitude to Prof Aurnab Ghose for his support and constant guidance through some challenging issues that Kalpa faced. I would also like to thank my predecessor, Aharna Sarkar, who has supported and provided criticism whenever needed. I will also like to take this opportunity, a bit sinfully, to thank and congratulate the members of the Student Council 2021 for a wonderful tenure and their collaborations with Kalpa. I wish the best to the general students’ body and hope you do your part to hold the Council and Kalpa responsible for their duties.


Manav Sivaram (Managing Editor, Kalpa)
