---
title: "The Impractical Practicals"
description: "When we received the kit, Asmi felt excited at the idea of doing experiments at home whereas Pranjal gave a big sigh of “Alright, let’s get this over with”. Despite this initial difference in opinions and several ups and downs throughout the course, we eventually came to agree on one thing — this course was a mistake... "
authors: ["Asmi", "Pranjal"]
pubDate: "2022-01-07"
heroImage: "/impractical.jpg"
type: "opeds"
---

When we received the kit, Asmi felt excited at the idea of doing experiments at home whereas Pranjal gave a big sigh of “Alright, let’s get this over with”. Despite this initial difference in opinions and several ups and downs throughout the course, we eventually came to agree on one thing — this course was a mistake. 


The kit consisted of several items, which were (in order of how much they enticed the inner child) a syringe with the needle, two strong magnets, a plastic Vernier Calliper, a ruler, two marbles, an aluminium plate, a thread and a sheet of paper with a giant protractor printed on it. Speculation and mischief ensued, but soon came the orientation which explained the plan of the course.


We were told that the first set of experiments which were to be performed and reported on (the ‘K1’ experiments) were about ‘understanding measurement’ — the kinds of errors that can creep in, the importance of repeating experiments several times, and so on. Two bold announcements from the professors followed; first, all the kit-based experiments would have to be done using only the materials provided in the kit and basic household items — to the extent that even the use of a watch for measuring the time period of a pendulum was not recommended (unless no other way was conceivable). Second, the course would be ‘open-ended’ and doing more than what was asked for was encouraged. Pranjal was now beginning to look forward to this course! As was soon revealed, however, the professors were not very keen on sticking to their word on this. 


The K1 series kicked off with an experiment for measuring the amount of water that can fit in a spoon using the syringe’s gradation. This procedure was to be repeated 100 times, which made the contents of the Python course come handy! By virtue of his excitement, Pranjal did do more than what was asked for, demonstrating that adding soap reduces the surface tension of water since lesser soapy water fits in the spoon than tap water. Asmi, on the other hand, was starting to feel her enthusiasm fade already due to the excessive repetitions which were to be performed. The next experiment was to measure the capacity of a spoon in a different way, counting how many grains (small ones, such as rice, masoor dal, etc.) fit in the spoon. Once again, creativity by virtue of excitement struck Pranjal and that made his job simpler by taking a fixed number of grains and counting not how many of them fit in the spoon, but rather how many were left out. Consequently, he got away with counting 20-30 grains at each repetition instead of 130-140. At this point, Pranjal too started feeling an enthusiasm deficiency. Two more experiments followed, but now it was just a matter of getting it over with. Throughout this series of experiments, one theme was omnipresent — the professors showed a blatant disregard for the students’ time. It would have been enough to repeat each experiment 10-20 times, but 100 repetitions made it seem like the professors really thought there was nothing better than counting grains that a student could do with their time! One might wonder what the professors would say at the suggestion of repeating the same topic 100 times…


The K2 series followed, which had a series of experiments that involved measuring the time-period of a damped pendulum and deducing its damping constant. This required setting up the pendulum, and here the professors overlooked the availability of equipment and space to set up the pendulum; it required tranquil air and a long stand. Furthermore, the bold claims made in the beginning of the course were flushed down the drain. The professors gave instructions to use a ‘tracker software’ in order to get a position vs. time graph for the pendulum by feeding it a video of the pendulum in motion. Perhaps they forgot to include a camera and laptop in the kit! We nonetheless tried to do the experiment using only a stopwatch and deducing its damping constant from how long it took to stop. However, this method was not welcomed by the professors, and hence went open-endedness out the window as well.


Until this point, deadlines had been tight and stressful to meet; this course was taking up significant amounts of time away from other courses. However, the professors agreed to relax the deadlines a bit after some requests.


On came the K3 experiment, which was supposed to be about observing diffraction. Being able to see this phenomenon using only everyday objects seemed like an exciting proposition, but by now you must have realised the recurring theme here; this course was full of undelivered promises; what followed clearly showed that the professors hadn’t thought this course through well. We were supposed to obtain a diffraction pattern using a phone flashlight and pinhole, but the pattern which did appear was due to the lens cap on the flashlight. There were tell-tale signs in the pattern that something was wrong — it was too sharp and clear for a makeshift set up without proper equipment, the white light did not split into its constituent colours, and some students got two rings in their pattern which did not show the kind of wave superposition one would expect if diffraction was occurring. The most amusing example, however, was the square pattern one student obtained — owing to the lens of their flashlight being square, or, perhaps, some previously unknown physics. Thankfully the professors realised their mistake and cancelled this experiment, but this was only after the report submission deadline had arrived; several students had already completed their report and wasted valuable time in the process. 


The second half of the semester brought with it the video experiments’ series, for which we were provided the data obtained after performing certain experiments in the lab — our task was to perform error analysis on it. The professors did try to make the job a bit interesting by asking us to think of explanations for certain observations, but it was largely just a dry task of performing some calculations on the given data. Of particular note was the thermal expansion experiment (aka V4), in which the given data had discrepancies in the least count of the instruments used — readings with more precision than should be possible using the equipment we were told was used. Furthermore, the first datapoint of each of the provided datasets was an outlier to the extent that it clearly indicated a case of human error in performing the experiment. Due to little to no explanation of the procedure of the experiment being provided, it was not possible for us to think of why this happened either. If a student had presented that kind of data, they would have certainly lost a good bit of their grade. 


The aim of having courses from all subjects in the first three semesters of the BSMS curriculum, according to the institution, is to give students exposure to all subjects so that they will be able to make an informed choice of what subject to pursue as a career. The lab courses, then, must be meant to give a taste of what it is like to work in a lab. It would also not be unreasonable to expect that the experience from this course should have led some people to consider working in experimental physics. However, this course fulfilled neither expectation — instead, it led some students who were initially keen on physics to question their choice. In the drive to conduct all courses which would have been conducted during normal times, perhaps the grander goal of using these courses as an opportunity to give crucial exposure required for making informed decisions took a back seat. So kudos to you, IISER Pune; task failed successfully.



Featured image credits: Vedhanth SVU

The content published is entirely the author’s opinions and does not necessarily reflect the views of Kalpa.
